---
layout: post
title: "수리통계학"
description: ""
date: 2018-03-10
tags: [statistic, mathematical statistics, study]
comments: true
---



# 1. Probability & Distribution



## 1.1 Introduction

#### Definition

1. Statistical(random) experiment.
   - The outcome can not be predicted with certainly prior to the performance of experiment.
2. Sample space.
   - Collection of every possible outcome from the random[^1] experiment and denoted $$\mathscr{C}$$.
3. Event.
   - Subset of `Sample space` and denoted by A, B, C$$\cdots$$.

> ex 1.1) Consider tossing a coin, 
> ​	then $$\mathscr{C}=\left\{\text{H, T}\right\}$$.
>
> ex 1.2) Consider tossing two dice(one red, the other white),
> ​	then $$\mathscr{C}=\left\{\left(1, 1\right)\cdots\left(6,6\right)\right\}$$
>
> ex 1.3) Consider sum seven when tossing two dice,
>
> ​	then $$\mathscr{C}=\left\{\left(1, 6\right), \left(2, 5\right), \cdots \left(6, 1\right)\right\}$$



#### Remark 1.1

Two types of probability.

1. Relative Frequency[^2].
2. Personal[^3].

--------------------------------------------------------



## 1.2 Set Theory

#### Definition 1.2.1

- If each element of set $$C_1$$ is also an element of set $$C_2$$, then $$C_1$$ is called **subset** of $$C_2$$, and denoted by $$C_1\subset C_2$$.

#### Definition 1.2.2

- If a set $$C$$ has no elements, tehn $$C$$ is called the **NULL**(empty) set, and denoted by $$C=\varnothing$$.

#### Definition 1.2.3

- The set of all elements that belong to at least $$C_1$$ or $$C_2$$ is called the **union** of $$C_1$$ and $$C_2$$, and denoted by $$C_1\cup C_2$$.
- It can be generalized to any number of sets $$C_1\cup C_2 \cup \cdots : =\bigcup_{k=1}^\infty C_k$$

> ex 1.2.7) 
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> 	C_k = & \left\{x:\frac{1}{k+1}\le x\le1\right\},\quad k=1,2,3,\cdots \\
> 	\Rightarrow	& \bigcup_{k=1}^{\infty}C_k = \left\{x: 0 \lt x\le 1\right\}
> \end{aligned}
> $$
>

#### Definition 1.2.4

- The set of all elements that belong to each of  $$C_1$$ and $$C_2$$ is called the **intersection** of $$C_1$$ and $$C_2$$, and denoted by $$C_1\cap C_2$$.
- It can be generalized to any number of sets $$C_1\cap C_2 \cap \cdots := \bigcap_{k=1}^\infty C_k$$

> ex 1.2.11)
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> 	C_k = & \left\{x:0\lt x\lt \frac{1}{k}\right\} \\
> 	\Rightarrow & \bigcap_{k=1}^{\infty}C_k = \varnothing
> \end{aligned}
> $$
>

#### Definition 1.2.6

- Let $$C \subset \mathscr{C}$$, then the set that consists of all element of $$\mathscr{C}$$, that are not elements of $$C$$ is called the **complements** of $$C$$, and denoted by $$C^c, \overline{C}$$.



A function is called point or set function. its domain is point or set respectively.

> ex 1.2.24)
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> 	Q\left(c\right)=\underbrace{\int\cdots\int_{0}^{x_2}}_{\text{n times folded}} d_{x1}d_{x2}\cdots dx_n
> \end{aligned}
> $$
> If $$C=\left\{\left(x_1, x_2,\dots, x_n\right): 0\le x_1\le x_2 \le \cdots\le x_n \le 1\right\}$$, then
> $$
> \begin{aligned}
> 	Q\left(C\right) =& \int_0^1\int_0^{x_n}\cdots\int_0^{x_3}\int_0^{x_2}dx_1dx_2\cdots dx_{n-1}dx_n \\
> 	= & \frac{1}{n!},
> \end{aligned}
> $$
>





------------------------------

## 1.3 The Probability Set Function

#### Definition 1.3.1 $\left(\sigma-filed\right)$

- Let $$\beta$$ be a collection of subset of $$\mathscr{C}$$[^4].
- We say $$\beta$$ is a **$$\sigma-field$$**,
- if 
  1. $$\emptyset \notin \beta$$
  2. $$C\in \beta \Rightarrow C^c\in \beta$$ (cloed under complement)
  3. $$C_1, C_2\cdots\in\beta\Rightarrow\bigcup_{i=1}^{\infty}$$(closed under countable union)



#### Definition 1.3.2 $\left(Probability\right)$

- $$\mathscr{C}$$ : Sample Space.
- $$\beta$$ : Borel $$\sigma-field$$.
- P : Real-valued function defined on $$\beta$$
  Probability set function if it satisfied,
  1. $$P\left(c\right)\ge0, \quad \forall C\in\beta\quad$$  **(Non Negative)**
  2. $$P\left(e\right)=1,\quad$$           **(Normality)**
  3. $$C_1, C_2, \cdots\in\beta, \quad C_m\cap C_n = \emptyset,\quad \forall m\neq n$$
     $$\Rightarrow P\left(\bigcup_{i=1}^{\infty}C_i\right) = \sum_{i=1}^{\infty}P\left(i\right),\quad$$**(Countable additivity)**

##### Theorem 1.3.1

$$
\begin{aligned}
	P\left(c\right) = 1-P\left(C^c\right), \quad \forall C\in\beta
\end{aligned}
$$

- Proof.
  - $$\mathscr{C} = C\cup C^c$$
  - $$P\left(\mathscr{C}\right)= P\left(C\right) + P\left(C^c\right)\quad \left(\because\text{Countable Addictivity}\right)$$
  - $$P\left(\mathscr{C}\right) = 1\qquad\qquad\qquad\quad \left(\because Normality\right)$$

##### Theorem 1.3.2

$$
\begin{aligned}
	P\left(\phi\right) = 0
\end{aligned}
$$

- Proof.
  - $$\mathscr{C}= \mathscr{C}\cup\emptyset$$
  - $$P\left(\mathscr{C}\right) = P\left(\mathscr{C}\right) + P\left(\emptyset\right)$$



##### Theorem 1.3.3

$$
C_1\subset C_2 \Rightarrow P\left(C_1\right)\le P\left(C_2\right)
$$

- Proof.
  - $$C_2 = C_1\cup\left(C_2\cap C_1^c\right)$$
  - $$\phi\ \ = C_1\cap \left(C_1^c\cap C_2\right)$$
  - $$P\left(C_2\right)=P\left(C_1\right)+P\left(C_2\cap C_1^c\right)$$



##### Theorem 1.3.4

$$
0\le P\left(C\right) \le 1, \quad \forall C \le \beta
$$

- Proof.
  - $$\phi \subset C \subset \mathscr{C}$$
  - $$0 = P\left(\phi\right) \le P\left(C\right) \le P\left(\mathscr{C}\right) = 1$$



##### Theorem 1.3.5

$$
\begin{aligned}
	P\left(C_1\cup C_2\right) = & P\left(C_1\right) + P\left(C_2\right) - P\left(C_1\cap C_2\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

- Proof.
  $$
  \begin{aligned}
  	C_1 \cup C_2 = &\ C_1 \cup \left(C_2 \cap C_1^c\right) \\
  	C_2 = &\ \left(C_1 \cap C_2\right) \cup \left(C_2 \cap C_1^c\right) \\
  	\text{from Countable}& \ \text{additivity from definition 1.3.1} \\
  	P\left(C_1 \cup C_2\right) = &\ P\left(C_1\right) + P\left(C_2 \cap C_1^c\right) \\
  	P\left(C_2\right) = & \ P\left(C_1 \cap C_2\right) + P\left(C_2\cap C_1^c\right)
  \end{aligned}
  $$




#### Remark 1.3.2

















[^1]: unbiased
[^2]: Objective
[^3]: Subjective
[^4]: Sample Space

